One of the three cardinal principles of the Maoist Internationalist Movement is that First World today is dominated by parasitic classes. Rather than having a large internal class of laborers who produce surplus value for capitalists, in imperialist countries, the vast majority of the population are actually net *recipients* of surplus value produced by workers in the Third World.

The basic reasoning behind this is actually rather straightforward. We live in an imperialist era, where a relative handful of wealthy countries take advantage of Third World labor to increase their own wealth. Through capital export and repatriation of profits, unequal exchange, the maintenance of large trade deficits, and the enforcement of low wages and poor working conditions in the Third World via economic strangulation and military force, imperialist countries essentially sap the Third World of a great deal of its wealth. The short of it is that the First World bourgeoisie increases its profits by exploiting low-wage labor in the Third World. And the bourgeoisie in the First World makes such a killing on this project that they can afford to take some of the profit they get from exploiting Third World labor and give it to imperialist country workers (in the form of high wages, benefit packages, etc.). In other words, workers in imperialist countries receive some of the surplus value that is generated by workers in the Third World. This is the main reason why living standards are so much higher for people in general in the First World when compared to the Third World: the large majority of people in the imperialist countries are able to command wealth essentially taken from Third World workers.

Why would the First World bourgeoisie want to pay "their" workers high wages and provide job stability and benefits? The answer is that the ruling class of any empire has a vested interest in keeping the populace at home relatively passive. If imperialists are going to make trouble abroad, it makes sense to ensure that there is relatively little unrest at home to complicate the imperialist project. So the bourgeoisie in imperialist countries have a real interest in making sure that the class struggle at home does not produce revolutionary change. And relying primarily on low-wage, Third World labor gives the imperialist bourgeoisie the resources to facilitate relative passivity among First World populations. By heavily exploiting labor in the Third World, the First World bourgeoisie is able to allow workers at home to share in the spoils while still making a profit themselves. The hope is that the population within imperialist countries will remain relatively loyal and allow the imperialist bourgeoisie to continue to draw upon Third World labor as the main source of their profits.

The result of this sharing of profits with First World workers is that resistance to capitalism is deadened in imperialist countries, and what resistance there is, is mostly made up of struggles that further accentuate the divide between First World and Third World workers. The narrow struggles of First World workers usually end up creating a community of interests between those workers and the bourgeoisie. By pursuing higher wages or defending its existing living standards, First World workers form a common interest in the maintenance of imperialism, since those wages and living standards are in fact predicated on imperialist exploitation of Third World labor. And obviously, the bourgeoisie also wants to maintain imperialism, so although First World workers sometimes do struggle against "their" bourgeoisie, these are usually struggles around how much of the imperialist pie the workers get to have. Both the workers and the bourgeoisie in the First World are generally united against the workers of the Third World, *in practice* if not always in words.

We call this group of imperialist-country workers who benefit from imperialism, and who act around an interest to maintain imperialism, the labor aristocracy.

How large is the labor aristocracy? The MIM's analysis is that the labor aristocracy makes up the large majority of the population in imperialist countries. The profits that the First World bourgeoisie gets from exploiting Third World labor are so great that the imperialist bourgeoisie can afford to bring nearly the whole population in First World countries in on the imperialist spoils. This fact, combined with the fact that the political and economic institutions of First World workers have both consistently failed to challenge imperialism and their own position within it seriously, and have actually shored up First World workers' narrow interests against the Third World proletariat, means that essentially all legally employed persyns in the First World constitute a labor aristocracy. In other words, First World countries have virtually no proletariat of their own.

## Economic basis of the labor aristocracy

We realize the claim that there is virtually no proletariat in the First World, and that there is instead a large labor aristocracy that constitutes the majority of the population, is a strong one that requires good evidence. So let's consider some of that evidence. 

On the strictly economic side of the question, our analysis is that the extent to which First World workers receive surplus value extracted from Third World workers is so great, that First World workers produce virtually no surplus value themselves. That is to say, wages and benefits in the First World are substantial enough---owing to the heavy exploitation of Third World labor---that whatever value First World workers produce is paid for in full, and many First World workers even command *more value than they produce*. We think this is pretty easy to demonstrate.

The United $tates is an interesting case to look at first because it is on one hand an imperialist formation, and in our analysis has a large labor aristocracy. However it is also a multinational formation that has both an oppressor nation---Amerika (the "white nation")---and several oppressed nations within it: New Afrika (the "Black nation"), Atzlán (the Chican@ nation), Borikén ("Puerto Rico"), and numerous indigenous nations. Within the United $tates, we can to some extent see how the dynamics of imperialism function without looking beyond the borders of the U.$. Of course, we do live in a highly globalized economy today, but our critics love to ignore the contributions of Third World economies to the U.$. and other imperialist countries. So for the time being, we'll grant our critics' assumptions and pretend that the U.$. economy is totally separate from the rest of the world.

Back in 1992, the MIM demonstrated that *even if* we assume that Third World economies contribute *nothing* to the U.$. economy, "racial" discrimination (i.e. national oppression) easily accounts for *all profits in the United $tates*. In other words, the MIM showed that wherever the surplus value that U.$ capitalists realized as profit came from, it could not possibly have come from Amerikan ("white") workers.

But 1992 was a long time ago, so let's update the MIM's original analysis with more recent figures.

Let's consider a scenario: suppose the U.$. were to eliminate all surplus value that the Amerikan nation produces, so that Amerikan workers have a rate of surplus value of 0%. This means that if an Amerikan worker were to produce 1 hour of value, ey would be paid a wage that would allow em to command 1 hour of value in return. And let's suppose that instead of exploiting Amerikan workers, the U.$. bourgeoisie wanted to rely entirely on lower-wage workers in the U.$. internal semi-colonies as the source of their profits. What would this scenario look like? How much profit could the capitalist make?

So, reminding ourselves that we are assuming that the U.$. economy is totally cut off from the rest of the world, in our model U.$. GDP represents the total price of goods and services produced in the U.$. and also the total value of those goods and services (in the aggregate, total value = total price according to Marxist theory). In 2010, the most recent census year at the time of writing, U.$. GDP was $15.23 trillion. And according to the U.$. census, in that same year, "Blacks," "Hispanics," and indigenous people (the closest measures for oppressed nations we could find in the census) accounted for about 30% of the population.<sup><a name="note1">[1](#ref1)</a></sup> So, assuming that people in oppressed nations within the U.$. perform about 30% of the labor in the U.$., 30% of the total value produced in the U.$., or 30% of U.$. GDP in this analysis, should have been produced by oppressed nation workers.

**Total value produced by oppressed nation workers** = 30% x $15.23 trillion = **$4.57 trillion.**

So in this scenario based on real-world data, oppressed nation workers produced $4.57 trillion in value. How much were they paid in return? Recall that we are considering what things would look like if Amerikan workers were paid exactly what they produced. This means that if oppressed nation workers were paid the same as Amerikan workers, they would have been paid $4.57 trillion in 2010, the same as what they produced. But in reality, in 2010 oppressed nation workers in the aggregate were only paid about 56% of what Amerikan workers made.<sup><a name="note2">[2](#ref2)</a></sup> So,

**Total wages of oppressed nation workers** = 56% x $4.57 trillion = **$2.56 trillion.**

If we take the difference between what oppressed nation workers produced and what they were actually paid, then we get how much profit the capitalists made from oppressed nation workers.

**Profit from oppressed nation workers** = $4.57 trillion - $2.56 trillion = **$2.01 trillion.**

So, even if we assume that Third World economies contribute nothing to the U.$., if Amerikan workers produced no surplus value at all, the amount of profit that capitalists would have received from discrimination alone in 2010 would have been $2.01 trillion. In other words, if the U.$. *only* exploited labor in the internal semi-colonies, they still would have been able to make $2.01 trillion in profit. Since the actual U.$. after tax corporate profit in 2010 was about $1.5 trillion, we can safely say that yes, *even if* the U.$. economy is totally isolated from the rest of the world, **internal national oppression still more than accounts for all of the profit realized in the U.$.** This means Amerikan workers can't really be producing surplus value in any significant quantity.

Of course, the U.$ economy is not isolated from the rest of the world, and U.$. GDP is *not* a good measure of the amount of value *produced* in the United $tates. In reality, GDP includes a lot of value extracted from Third World workers and realized in the U.$.<sup><a name="note3">[3](#ref3)</a></sup> But the point of the above analysis is to show that, even granting one of the most stringent assumptions of chauvinist pseudo-Marxists, that everything in U.$. GDP is produced internally, the majority of the U.$. population can't be producing surplus value.

How does the picture change when we acknowledge that Third World labor contributes substantially to imperialist economies, and how do things look in non-U.$. imperialist countries?

When we are looking at the world economy and the economic relations between First World and Third World countries, it becomes significantly more complex to make estimates of exactly how much Third World labor contributes to the capitalists' profits in the First World, and how much workers in the First World are getting from Third World labor. However, one way to get a general ballpark is to estimate the value of money, which is the same as how much value money circulates on average over a period of time.

Gross world product is a rough measure of the total price and in turn the total value of commodities produced in the world economy. To be more precise, it is a dollar figure that, in Marxist terms, roughly represents the amount of money that circulated all of the world's value in the year. If we divide this figure by the total amount of labor-time performed in the world, we get a measure of the amount of money that circulates a set amount of value, measured in labor-time. This is also an expression of the value of money, as it gives us an estimate of the amount of value money is able to circulate on average over the course of a year.

In 2015, gross world product was about $78 trillion for the year. There were about 3.5 billion workers in the world who collectively performed 3.5 billion labor-years of work to produce that value. This means that, on average, over the course of the year, it took about $22,000 to circulate 1 labor-year of value ($78 trillion / 3.5 billion). Therefore, as ballpark estimate, anyone who makes more than about $22,000 a year is able to command more labor than they themselves expend. With a year's worth of wages or salaries, these workers are able to purchase commodities that in total took *more than a year to produce*. These workers do not produce surplus value and are actually on the whole *recipients* of surplus value.

Since the majority of people in imperialist countries make more than $22,000 a year, we feel pretty confident in saying that the majority of the population in imperialist countries does not produce surplus value. Notably, this includes many people in internal semi-colonies and national minorities within the First World. We of course recognize that oppressed nation people within the First World are more brutally oppressed than white workers, and they may even be producing surplus value in some pockets (especially undocumented workers). However, we do think it is important to acknowledge how even oppressed nation people in the First World can benefit to a degree from imperialism, e.g. through receiving wages that are partially paid for out of value produced by Third World workers. Even among oppressed nation people in the First World, their proximity to imperialism and the degree to which they benefit from imperialism can and does structure the struggles that emerge among these populations, which is an important strategic consideration.

We just calculated the value that money circulates on average, and this gives us a ballpark estimate of who is producing surplus value. But that isn't necessarily enough to give us a clear picture of all the people who have something to lose from the overthrow of imperialism. There are some workers who may produce some amount of surplus value, but still stand to lose if the imperalist system ended. That is to say, these workers have a living standard that could not be maintained if imperialism went away. 

If the capitalists made no profit at all, one might think that every worker in the world could get the equivalent of about $22,000 a year (gross world product divided by the number of workers). But in reality not all of the wealth that's produced in the world can go to workers, even if capitalists made no profit. Some wealth has to be set aside for infrastructure, social services, emergency funds, depreciation costs, and so on. We estimate that a little more than half of the wealth produced in the world has to go to these things, and not directly to workers, even if all the capitalists' profit was redistributed. So after accounting for all of those extra costs, we think a reasonable estimate for who has something to lose from the end of imperialism is anyone making around $10,000 a year or more. Put another way, $10,000 is roughly the mark where one is able to command a living standard that would be impossible if imperialism were not enforcing poverty on most of the world. The only way within the context of capitalism to make more than $10,000 a year is if workers elsewhere are poorer.

These calculations are of course all very preliminary. Zak Cope has done some more involved work in the book *Divided World Divided Class,* which estimates that exploitation of Third World labor accounts for about 95% of profits in the First World. This is yet another demonstration that, if there is any surplus value being produced in the First World, it's not very much. But there are certainly things about all of these calculations that one can knit-pick.

The point though is not to get an exact figure, but to show that no matter how you slice it, it is very unlikely that workers in the First World produce much surplus value. Among those workers in imperialist countries who may technically produce surplus value, most still receive payment that is over and above what would be possible without the extreme exploitation of Third World labor. 

This is not all there is to the labor aristocracy, but the basic economic foundation of the labor aristocracy is that the vast majority of people in First World countries are receiving surplus value extracted from Third World workers. This allows First World workers to attain a living standard and access to resources which would be impossible without imperialism, which helps produce a community of interests between workers in the First World and "their own" bourgeoisie.

## Political basis of the labor aristocracy

In order to demonstrate that the large majority of workers in imperialist countries form a labor aristocracy, a formation which is distinct from a proletariat, it is also necessary to discuss the political institutions of the labor aristocracy and why they are distinct from proletarian ones.

In truth, the labor movement in imperialist countries has been dominated by a labor aristocracy for most of its modern existence. This is especially true in the United $tates, which from its inception was a settler formation, but it is also true in other imperialist countries. Even during the time that many supposed communists consider the "good old days" of the First World labor movement---the fight for the 8-hour work day and such---labor movements were dominated by white workers who sought to secure shorter working hours, more job security, and better pay for themselves, while at the same time actively working to exclude oppressed nation people, national minorities, and immigrants from these benefits. Even while paying lip service to "unity" between "races," imperialist-country unions in the "hayday" of the labor movement in the First World *at best* consistently side-lined the specific concerns and interests of oppressed nation and national minority workers and in many cases worked to undermine those interests. In order to get anywhere, people of oppressed nations and national minorities within imperialist countries had to form their own organizations, independent of the organs of the "white" working classes in these countries.

Historically, this trend continued throughout the imperialist countries. The infamous betrayal of communist politics by the social-democratic parties of Europe, when they supported WWI, was to a large extent an expression of the political influence of the labor aristocracy. Lenin, of course, identified this at the time. Those social-democratic parties who supported the reactionary war indeed claimed that they were basing their support on the interests of the workers in their countries. And they may have been right. As Lenin described, the spoils of imperialism that the workers of Europe shared in converted those workers into patriotic, loyal servants of the empire when the prospect of war reared its head, and this process was sealed when the "working class" parties voted for war bonds. 

Of course, there was pretty substantial civil unrest in the 1960's and 70's in some First World countries. But this unrest had a strongly national character. On the one hand, oppressed nations within the First World (e.g. Ireland, New Afrika) were rising up. Additionally, rebelliousness among oppressor-nation workers and students was in large part organized around solidarity with the struggles of these oppressed nations and with Third World liberation movements, for example the struggle in Vietnam. At the same time however, some communist parties, such as the Communist Party of France, actively supported colonial projects. Others, such as the CPUSA, contributed to the liquidation of national liberation movements by absorbing some of their elements into one big umbrella, and then once again side-lining and undermining the specific interests of people of oppressed nations, subordinating the politics of national liberation to the frankly antagonistic interests of Amerikan workers. In short, when communist parties failed to challenge the narrow interests of privileged workers, failed to recognize that the defense of jobs and living standards predicated upon imperialism were not "proletarian" demands, they played a significant role in protecting imperialism from national liberation struggles, whether these parties were conscious of this role or not. This transformed these nominally communist parties into political organs of the labor aristocracy.

Today, communist parties in the First World are largely irrelevant. When they do manage to affect the political landscape, it is usually not in a positive way. For example, when communist parties tail struggles for higher wages among First World workers, they are pursuing a demand that *requires* imperialism to be met. Communist parties today still fail to take account of how much workers in imperialist countries benefit from Third World exploitation, and how this affects the interests, politics, and consciousness of First World workers. But owing to the weakness of these organizations, generally the politics of the labor aristocracy are expressed in other ways, for example, through social democratic movements which seek to more "equitably" distribute value stolen from Third World workers, or through openly chauvinistic political organizations which seek to protect "jobs" from immigrants and Third Worlders. 

On the subject of immigration, if it were strictly up to the bourgeoisie, we might actually see open borders, as a more competitive global workforce would drive down labor costs in the First World tremendously. But the capitalists don't do this because the labor aristocracy has through its political force secured a pact with the capitalists: closed borders, minimum wage, decent jobs, in exchange for relative social peace. In other words, the bourgeoisie in imperialist countries implements protectionist policies generally to satisfy the labor aristocracy (along with other petty-bourgeois strata), and the latter is an effect of the labor aristocracy's political power.

The point of all this is that, while workers in imperialist countries may rebel from time to time, in general this struggle, historically and today, has had the effect of defending imperialism and mediating (rather than challenging) the capitalist system. The political organizations of imperialist-country workers, to the extent that they have had independent political organs at all, have consistently acted in ways which reinforced national oppression and accentuated the divide between First World and Third World workers, rather than building *real* international solidarity. 

## Conclusions

To briefly sum up, our analysis is that the large majority of people in imperialist countries receive value approaching or great than what they actually produce. This alters the role that workers in imperialist countries perform, where they are no longer a significant source of surplus value. This is a consequence of the fact that imperialists are heavily exploiting Third World labor, and using some of the surplus value extracted from the Third World to "buy off" imperialist country workers. The extend of this sharing of surplus value is extremely significant today. Owing to that, workers in imperialist countries have a living standard and access to resources that would be impossible without imperialism, which helps produce a community of interests between First World workers and "their own" bourgeoisie. Politically, this has manifested in a labor movement in the First World that has consistently failed to challenge imperialism or capitalism and has in fact played an important role in the mantenance of the capitalist-imperialist system.

**Importantly, what this means is that the progressive forces in the First World are likely to be a very small minority at this time**. This obviously has widespread implications on our political work, as pandering to the interests of the majority within the First World will only hold revolution back, while operating within an environment where most of the populace is likely to be actively hostile to communist revolution requires special strategic considerations.

### Further reading

MIM(Prisons) study pack on the labor aristocracy - https://www.prisoncensorship.info/archive/study/sp248.pdf

MIM Theory 1: A White Proletariat? (reformatted version for ease of reading) - https://alyx.io/uploads/mim-theory/1-letter.pdf

Imperialism and Its Class Structure in 1997 - https://www.prisoncensorship.info/archive/etext/mt/imp97/index.html

J. Sakai - Settlers: Mythology of the White Proletariat - https://www.prisoncensorship.info/archive/books/settlers.pdf

H. W. Edwards - Labor Aristocracy: Mass Base of Social Democracy - https://www.prisoncensorship.info/archive/etext/contemp/whitemyths/edwards/index.html 

Zak Cope - Divided World Divided Class - https://www.prisoncensorship.info/archive/books/Economics/DividedWorldDividedClass_ZakCope.pdf

### Footnotes

<a name="ref1">[1.](#note1)</a> We used 2010 U.$. Census data to calculate what percentage of the U.$. population is made up of what the census labels as "Blacks," "Hispanics," "Native Americans," and "Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders." These totals equal about 30% of the population according to that data.

<a name="ref2">[2.](#note2)</a> Again based on 2010 U.$. data, we calculated the per capita income of "Blacks," "Hispanics," "Native Americans," and "Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders" taken all together. We then compared this per capita income to the per capital income of "Whites," and found that the per capita income of oppressed nation peope was 56% lower than that of Amerikans.

<a name="ref3">[3.](#note3)</a> See John Smith's article in *Monthly Review*, "The GDP Illusion: Value Added vs. Value Capture." https://monthlyreview.org/2012/07/01/the-gdp-illusion/
