In future theoretical or study materials, we will certainly address the topic of wimmin's liberation. The concepts of sex and gender are central to this discussion, and how we define these terms will affect how we understand and articulate wimmin's oppression. So, we think it is useful to discuss some shortcomings we find in the usual ways feminist theory utilizes these concepts and to provide a preliminary alternative.

In today's climate, the term "gender" gets thrown around extremely haphazardly. People use the word "gender" all the time, perhaps in multiple ways within the span of a single conversation. Yet, few people bother to systematically explore the word's meaning and the real-world phenomena it's meant to describe. Perhaps this is because it is always assumed that the audience should simply know what a persyn is talking about when ey says "gender." After all, we all fill out the appropriate "gender" box on our legal forms and pick "a gender" in our role-playing video games. But the reality is that what is meant by "gender" remains nebulous most of the time.

As for sex (as in, sexual difference), few people seem to want to talk about it at all.

We think the vagueness of popular notions of gender and sex seriously holds back scientific discussion of wimmin's liberation, and through that it holds back practice. Thus we believe it to be imperative that we start getting serious about what we really mean. That's what we intend to do here.

Before laying it out though, there are some considerations that we think are worth mentioning.

First of all, the way in which we will use terms like "gender" and "sex" will be different from the dominant ways in which those words are used, both in day-to-day life and in bourgeois academic discourse. As already mentioned, the dominant usages of these terms are extraordinarily vague. But even putting that aside for the moment, as communists, we are not going to get very far using the dominant versions of any concept, including dominant notions of gender and sex. Concepts are not neutral---they are a product of particular theory and political orientation. The concepts we use, and the way those concepts are constructed, reflect what standpoint we take in the class struggle. Thus, if we simply adopt the dominant ways in which terms like "sex" and "gender" are used, we risk polluting our theory with bourgeois ideology and a bourgeois theoretical system. If we want a theory which serves the proletariat, we need our own concepts. So the ways in which we will employ terms like "sex" and "gender" will at first be unfamiliar to readers, and that should not be immediately taken as a negative.

An analogy: the way Marx uses the term "value" in eir texts on political economy is considerably different than the way the term "value" gets used in everyday conversations and in bourgeois academic life. This is not a failing of Marx's theory but is in fact a necessary component of it. Bourgeois notions of "value" serve to obscure capitalism's roots in the exploitation of waged labor. In contrast, Marx's concept of "value" is tailored specifically to uncover the monstrosities of capitalism. Marx's usage of the term "value" obviously differs from common usages, but this difference is a big part of what enables Marx to "see" how capitalism really works. Likewise, dominant notions of "sex" and "gender" obscure and confuse an understanding of wimmin's oppression. We have to produce our own concepts of sex and gender if we want to concretely know how wimmin's oppression works and how to get rid of it.

The second thing we'll mention at the start is that, in contrast to what frequently happens in formal, propositional logic, we do not believe it to be possible to begin a scientific investigation with terms already defined concretely. To demand that we "define our terms" before we can begin constructing an argument, to demand that a concept be "clarified prior to the science" is, as the German philosopher Hegel put it, "to demand that it be considered outside the science; outside the science this cannot be accomplished..."<sup><a name="note1">[1](#ref1)</a></sup> In plainer terms, the concepts we use in a scientific investigation can only be elaborated in the course of the scientific investigation itself---and even the scope and boundaries of that investigation can only become clear within the actual practice of the science. Hence, the meaning of terms at the beginning of an investigation will be rather unclear, and their meaning will necessarily change and develop, becoming more nuanced and more concrete, as the scientific practice continues.

The reason we bring this up is so that readers will understand that the concepts of sex and gender that we will discuss shortly are not actually a starting point for theory, but are in fact a result of a theoretical effort that has already been conducted internally. Part of this argument is elaborated here. But many of the details of this theoretical labor have yet to be really systematized and put into writing (although we hope this will be done at some point in the future). In the interim, we believe it to still be useful to lay out our definitions, so that readers will know basically what we mean in our writings about wimmin's liberation. But readers should be aware that these definitions are indeed a result, and absent some of their theoretical development, readers may find some justification lacking or the discussion to be unsatisfactory in a number of ways.

## What is sex?

For the past few decades, popular trends in feminism have been pushing the category of sex firmly into the background. In contrast, we hold that sex---as a first approximation, the social division of bodies into two categories based on the (perceived) presence of certain reproductive organs---is in fact the most fundamental process of patriarchy. It will hopefully become clearer later on why we term sex a "process" (and why we say it is social). In the meantime, we note that social control of female bodies remains the most important component of wimmin's oppression (whether through restricting access to birth control, relegating wimmin to childbirth and housework, the use and abuse of wimmin's bodies through pornography and prostitution, etc.). So, in spite of numerous attempts to downplay its significance, sex still matters to wimmin's oppression; the female status is the foundational aspect of wimmin's existence.

Why is this unpopular to say? There are a couple of reasons. The more nefarious of these is that refusing to give sexual division its proper place in our theory of patriarchy allows the dominant versions of feminism to say a lot of things about wimmin's status, and appear to take on progressive stances, without actually getting to the core of what makes wimmin subordinate and why. This allows the ruling class to put on a feminist face, but the feminism that results is incapable of producing anything but vague reformist politics, or more recently, post-structuralist confusion that actively resists being put into practice and in some cases openly rejects the very possibility of liberation.

But there is also another reason that discussion of sex as central to wimmin's oppression is unpopular in certain communities, and it is a far more understandable one. In the past, many feminisms which put the category of sex at the center of their politics (for example, much of radical feminism) simply accepted the dominant ideology that sex is a natural and immutable division in the humyn species. If these terms are accepted, then locating the foundation of wimmin's oppression in the body and in particular in a supposedly natural bodily division causes a lot of problems. If the division of bodies into male and female is central to the oppression of wimmin, but such a division is actually an inevitable consequence of our biology, how is wimmin's oppression to be defeated? Moreover, these "naturalist" forms of feminism (those which locate the source of wimmin's oppression in natural bodily functions) have been weaponized by predominantly white, wealthy wimmin against marginalized wimmin, particularly trans wimmin. If this sort of pseudo-feminism was what we meant when we say we need to refocus our analysis on sex and its critical place in the system of patriarchy, then readers would be justified in running for the hills.

In truth though, we thoroughly reject the notion that wimmin's oppression is rooted in a *natural* bodily division. We believe that theories which make this claim are incapable of explaining wimmin's oppression with anything but tautologies. Further, the borderline fetishization of a biological identity and the uncritical acceptance of the mainstream "science" of sexual difference (which has from the very beginning been thoroughly contaminated by patriarchal assumptions and practice) exhibited by "naturalist" feminism strikes us as an absurd mirror-image of patriarchal ideology, rather than posing any significant challenge to the latter. For those reasons, "naturalist" feminisms can't aid us in the struggle against patriarchy.

Nevertheless, we believe the usual response to the failings of "naturalist" feminism---to either push sexual division into the background or to subsume and subordinate it to the now ubiquitous term "gender" (to be discussed in a moment)---is a wrong turning. We propose instead that sex be placed back in focus within our politics, but that our understanding of sex itself needs to change.

So, if sex is not a natural bodily division, then what is it? 

We hold that sex is a social relation wherein bodies are forcibly divided into two, counterposed modes of existence. As another MIM cell has pointed out,<sup><a name="note2">[2](#ref2)</a></sup> from a purely biological or anatomical standpoint, the closer we look at the humyn body, the harder it is to find places to draw clear dividing lines between bodily "types." Thus, in order to classify bodies into two, society must intervene and prioritize certain anatomical features over others, and ignore or pathologize variances in those features that it considers to be most important. 

This is exactly what the social relation of sex does. Sexual division involves most importantly the prioritization of genitals as a basis on which to divide bodies. Indeed, we can always ask: why are humyn bodies divided in such a fundamental way on the basis of genitals and not, say, on eye color or on the basis of whether ear lobes are attached or not? The very fact that the presence of certain genitals versus other genitals is more important in the ordering of bodies than eye color or ear lobes presupposes a certain set of social relations which make genital differences more important. The social relation of sex is what makes genitals a very important basis upon which bodies are socially ordered.

This is subtly but importantly different than saying that wimmin's oppression is founded on a natural biological division. Bodily differences, and especially (perceived) genital differences, do matter. But it is society that makes these differences matter, and it is society that divides people into "types" based on (perceived) genital differences. Recognizing this allows us to acknowledge that the body is the "raw material" out of which sex is produced, and that the body is also the most important terrain upon which wimmin's oppression plays out, while also seeing that sexual division and wimmin's oppression are historically contingent, social processes which can be overturned.

Why does sexual division involve the prioritization of genitals?

We believe this is because the division of bodies into two types---female and male---is really about making one set of bodies the sexual objects of the other. We come to this conclusion by noting that there are a few very basic experiences that come up repeatedly in the course of feminist political organization, which we hold are crucial to wimmin's status:

1. Patriarchy makes wimmin into baby-factories, for example by restricting access to birth control, eliminating opportunities for wimmin to gain economic independence, and by encouraging wimmin to become home-makers through immense social pressure and cultural/ideological inculcation;

2. Patriarchy makes wimmin into beings who men feel entitled to use sexually---wimmin are expected to accept whatever men may sexually desire, a regime enforced through rape and sexual violence in general;

3. Patriarchy makes wimmin into beings who embody male desire at all times and whose most basic "purpose" is to arouse men sexually---whenever doing anything, wimmin are expected to be "sexy" or "pretty" doing it, and wimmin are disproportionately forced into pornography and prostitution, institutions which are themselves objectifying in an extremely raw form, and in turn reinforce broader social patterns of objectification.

Not every womyn experiences all of these facets of patriarchy, but we would argue that all wimmin experience at least one. And what all of the above have in common is that these are processes that make wimmin into beings whose sexuality exists to be used, principally by men, an experience which we hold is definitely common to all wimmin.

The making of one's body into an object whose sexualness exists to be used, principally by men, is in our analysis the most fundamental component of the female status. We would say that a female body is one which, at the most basic level, is made into a thing whose "purpose" is to satisfy male sexual desire---whether that be in the form of becoming a baby-factory for men, becoming an object who must be ready to accept sexual advances at all times, becoming an object who must literally embody male desire always, or some combination of all of these.

This relation between male and female bodies, where female bodies exist to be sexually used by men, is also what makes the genitals an extremely important basis upon which the humyn body is socially divided. It is what makes the genitals the most important "marker" of sex. 

At a certain "obvious" level, the genitals are organs which are critically involved in sexual practices, and in patriarchy, in the practices of sexual dominance. Vulvas, uteri, etc. are in the context of patriarchy indicators of a subordinate role in the sexual practices layed out above, while penises, testicles, etc. are social indicators of the dominant roles. The genitals are also an important "terrain" upon which sexual dominance plays out. Much of wimmin's oppression involves the social regulation of what wimmin's genitals are "for," while men are encouraged to use their genitals to dominate wimmin.

It is worth mentioning here that, strictly speaking, all reproductive organs should matter here, and they do. But we believe that genitals still play the most important role in the division of bodies into sexes because these are the most socially visible reproductive organs, and when sex classification happens on other bases (e.g. internal parts of the reproductive system or on chromosomes), this classification is really about what genitals one is "supposed" to have. At the end of the day, sexual division prioritizes genitals when classifying bodies into two sexes because genitals are the most socially visible "marker" of a place in a relationship of sexual dominance.

To sum up so far, the humyn body is socially divided into two sexes because in patriarchy, roughly half of the population are made into sexual objects to be used by the other half. This relation of sexual dominance makes the reproductive anatomy and especially the genitals one of the most important bases upon which bodies are divided socially. Most crucially, female bodies are those who are made into objects to be used by men, and male bodies are those to which the sexual domination of wimmin is central. This relation of sexual dominance between female and male bodies is what makes the genitals the most important basis of sexual division. Again, it must be stressed that although bodily differences certainly matter here, it is a social relation of sexual dominance that corrals bodily differences into what we understand as sex, i.e. it is a social relation which produces sex out of anatomical "raw material."

In short, we define sex as the social process through which bodies are forcibly divided into two "types", principally on the basis of (perceived) genital differences, and this division is produced by relations of sexual dominance.

This conclusion allows us to re-affirm some of what was landed upon in past feminisms, i.e. that the very division of bodies into sexes has a great deal to do with wimmin's oppression, while also realizing that this division is hardly natural and is in fact a product of social relations which are possible to change. As Catharine MacKinnon once put it, sexual difference is a function of sexual dominance, and both are central to wimmin's subordinate status. If we want to be able to do something about wimmin's oppression, it makes sense for us to re-focus on sex in our analysis, while also identifying the social and historically contingent roots of the sexual division itself. 

## What is gender?

Typically, the way the term "gender" gets used in popular discourse dangerously conflates three related but distinct things: gender identity, the system of material practices that constitute masculinity and femininity, and wimmin and men as positions within a patriarchal structure. We believe that these three things are related but are nonetheless distinct.

We define gender as a system where people are coerced into performing acts socially coded as masculine or feminine. In other words, what we are talking about is what is sometimes called "gender roles." The problem with the notion of "gender roles" however is that it tends to presuppose gender and then say that people of "a certain gender" are coerced into performing certain roles. In contrast to this, we hold that gender itself has no existence apart from the masculine and feminine "roles," or to be more precise, practices.  

Since we understand gender as a system of practices, we do not conceive of gender as something one can "have" or "be." Further, we refuse to get caught up in debates about "how many genders" there are. In our analysis, this very question is completely incoherent.

To elaborate on what exactly the system of practices of masculinity and femininity are, it may help to discuss the relation of gender to sex. Gender is structured by sex in a number of ways. The sexing of bodies determines to a great extent the practices one is expected to fulfill. Those sexed as female are socially pressured to enact feminine "roles," while those sexed as male are expected to enact masculine "roles." That much is fairly obvious.

What may be less obvious is that the interrelation of sex and gender makes gender into a social code for sex. Because genital information is usually hidden from plain view in social interactions, gender practices end up substituting here. Those engaging in a consistent package of feminine practices, for example, are assumed to have the "appropriate" genitals (e.g. vulvas, etc.). Thus, gender practices are involved in the sexing of bodies itself.

On the one hand, this fact means that gender can "act back" upon sex and that changes in gender practice can alter how people are socially sexed, i.e. changes in gender practices can affect the place one's body occupies in the sexual division (we may say more about this at a later time). On the other hand, the fact that gender contains information about a person's genitals (whether actual or assumed or the genitals one is "supposed" to have) is another way in which sex structures the boundaries of gender. The point at which gender practices become "unacceptable" is the point at which they begin to interrupt how one's body is sexed. Wimmin who adopt some masculine practices, for example, are in effect communicating conflicting information about their sex, and for that they are punished until and unless they adopt "one or the other" gender (and sexual) modes.

Further, the boundaries of what precisely constitute masculinity and femininity to begin with are structured by sex. Feminine practices are those which are expected to be assigned to---and which reinforce---the female sex, while masculine practices are those which are expected to be assigned to---and which reinforce---the male sex. It may be helpful to remind ourselves here that sex is in turn a social division of bodies where some bodies---which become female---are made into objects whose sexuality exists to be used by other bodies---which are male. Feminine practices, then, are those which are ultimately seen as consistent with a male image of female sexuality. Masculine practices are those which are seen as consistent with sexual dominance and in particular dominance over wimmin.

What then are people talking about when they are talking about "different genders." In our analysis, any talk of "gender" as something one "has" or "is" is actually referring to *gender identity*, which we feel is related to but distinct from gender itself. Gender and sex are the structure, the material practices we engage in. Gender identity is the way we as individuals *relate to* these practices, and through various norms and representations that are shown to us, learn to "see ourselves" in the relations of sex and gender. In other words, gender identity happens at the level of ideology. It constitutes our *imagined* relations (i.e. our self-image of our relations) to the world, and specifically to the practices of sex and gender.

Ideology is a crucial part of how we understand ourselves and our interactions in society. It's not really useful or sensible to moralize at people for being engulfed in ideology, because we all are. But ideology is not the main level at which we want to focus our analysis. Ideology always presupposes some structure of practices, and a relation to that structure is what ideology helps us make sense of. As communists, that structure around which ideology emerges is what we are most interested in.

In terms of gender identity, there are any number of sensible ways in which our self-images get produced through ideology. One persyn's engagements with the world and how ey are exposed to various images and representations of sex and gender practices may lead em to conclude, "I am a womyn." Another persyn, engaging in the practices surrounding sex and gender in a somewhat different way, may conclude "I am a man," or "I'm non-binary," or any other category. In our view, all of these identities are equally valid (or equally invalid, it doesn't matter). We don't actually think non-binary identifications are any less sensible than saying "I'm a womyn" or "I'm a man." We also have no interest in telling any particular persyn or group of people that even though they say they're one thing, they're really a different thing. That kind of argument is really just about replacing one ideological category with another, when what we really want to do is shift focus away from the ideological level entirely and put it onto the social practices around which these various gender identities emerge in the first place. 

This is not to say of course that gender identity and ideology in general have no significance. It is true that changes in gender identity, i.e. changes in the way one conceptualizes oneself in relation to the structures one is embedded in, can manifest in changes in gender practices, which can in turn alter the way one's body is sexed and ultimately where one falls in the system of patriarchy. Ideology, and gender identity specifically, can definitely "act back" on the structural components of the system---sex and gender. But the material practices/relations/processes of sex and gender still play the predominant role (ultimately our social being determines our social consciousness) and hence these are what we are most interested in.

## What are women?

Womyn (singular) is an identity category. *Wimmin* (plural) refers to a structural position within the patriarchal system. Wimmin is a *place*. We do not consider wimmin (or men, for that matter) to be "a sex" or "a gender," as these terms are insufficient to describe what wimmin are. Wimmin as a structural place is produced by the interrelation of sex and gender.

Those occupying the place of wimmin are subjected to forces which sex their bodies as female. That is to say, wimmin's bodies are coerced into a mode of existence where the body becomes most fundamentally sexual, and this sexuality does not exist for wimmin but really to be used by men. In turn, wimmin are coerced into performing feminine gender practices, practices which are both consistent with a male image of female sexuality and, in large part *because* female sexuality exists for the benefit of men, feminine gender practices reinforce wimmin's subordination. Meekness, passivity, domesticity, etc. are some examples. When wimmin violate feminine stereotypes, e.g. by holding positions of power or striving for financial independence, in some cases even these practices can be reconfigured by patriarchy as feminine to the extent that violations of stereotypes are seen as "sexy." In other cases, wimmin are simply punished through violence for "failing" to adhere to feminine gender norms.

No one of course is *totally* determined by their place in the position of wimmin, and the structure of patriarchy can never completely mold wimmin into its ideal image. But what is important is that those occupying the place of wimmin are subject to a force-*ing*, a *process* which is constantly trying to keep them subordinate and existing for men's benefit. That *process*, and how it works, is what matters---not necessarily how completely or perfectly patriarchy has molded particular people into wimmin at any particular moment.

Following from this analysis, we believe it to be unproductive to wring our hands about who on an individual level is a womyn or not. We don't really care how individual people are socially "read." We don't even really care about who has "male privilege" or not. Frankly we are not really interested in identity politics at all. Our focus is on material practices. Thus, we believe it to be far more important to identify the practices and relations which produce wimmin as subordinate, and to attack those practices and relations *wherever they manifest*.

### Footnotes
  
<a name="ref1">[1.](#note1)</a> From Book I of Hegel's Logic section 92. https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/hegel/works/hl/hlbegin.htm

<a name="ref2">[2.](#note2)</a> MIM(Prisons), "Attacking the Myth of Binary Biology," https://www.prisoncensorship.info/article/attacking-the-myth-of-binary-biology-mimprisons-eliminates-gendered-language/
